# Exercise 2: Leap, Suffix, Days

This is a programming exercise for you to solve on your own.  You can submit but it will not be graded.  Test cases are provided for the exercises so that you can test and check on your own if your code is correct.  Feel free to discuss your solution with your peers or your TAs.

### Prerequisite

- You are able to access the [CS1010 programming environment](environments.md).
- You are familiar with [basic UNIX CLI](unix.md) and using terminal-based editor [`vim`](vim.md).
- You have a GitHub account and have setup `.gitconfig` (see [Exercise 1](ex02.md)).

### Learning Outcomes

- Be comfortable writing correct C programs that involve `if`, `else`, and logical statements.

### Setup

- Click on [this link](https://classroom.github.com/a/GejVPTXy) to accept the exercise.
- Log in to one of the hosts of [CS1010 programming environment (PE)](environments.md)
- Run the following on the command line on one of the PE hosts:

```
~cs1010/get-ex02
```

- You should see a new subdirectory `ex02-<githubid>` in your current working directory, where `githubid` is your GitHub ID.
- Inside that directory, you should see a bunch of files:
    - `leap.c`, `suffix.c`, and `days.c` are the most important files.  They are the skeleton C code that you should edit to solve the exercise.
    - `inputs` and `outputs` are subdirectories that contain test inputs and test outputs.  We use the same convention as Exercise 1 so you should be familiar with them.
    - `Makefile`: This is the configuration for the tool `make` that we use to automate the compilation and testing of the programs.  
    - `test.sh`: This is a bash script for testing your code.

### Solving The Assignments

- Edit the .c files to solve the corresponding question as described below
- You can assume that all test inputs are valid inputs.
- To compile and run the given tests with the sample inputs and outputs, run on the command line,

```
make
```

This will compile all your C files and if there is no error, run the test scripts.


### Submission

When you are ready, run the following command while you are in the exercise directory:

```
~cs1010/submit-ex02
```

The .c files will be uploaded to GitHub.  You can submit multiple times.  As an exercise is not graded, submitting your code only serves the purpose of archiving your work for backup purposes.

-------

# Question 1: Leap Year

A [leap year](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leap_year) is a calendar year containing an extra day to synchronize the calendar to seasons and astronomical events.  In the Gregorian calendar, years that are multiples of four (with the exception of years divisible by 100 but not by 400) are leap years.

Write a program that reads in an integer representing a year from the standard input and prints out "<year> is a leap year" if the input is a leap year.  Otherwise, print "<year> is not a leap year" to the standard output.

Your program should include a `bool` function `is_leap_year` that takes in the input year and returns `true` if the input is a leap year and returns `false` otherwise.

### Sample run:

```
ooiwt@pe112:~/ex02-ooiwt$ ./leap
1995
1995 is not a leap year
ooiwt@pe112:~/ex02-ooiwt$ ./leap
1996
1996 is a leap year
ooiwt@pe112:~/ex02-ooiwt$ ./leap
1900
1900 is not a leap year
ooiwt@pe112:~/ex02-ooiwt$ ./leap
2000
2000 is a leap year
```


# Question 2: Ordinal Suffix
In English, an ordinal number is written with numerals, followed by its letter suffixes.  For instance: 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 11th, 31st, etc.  The rule is that, a number that ends with digit 1 should have a suffix "st" (except if it ends with 11), a number that ends with 2 should have a suffix "nd" (except if it ends with 12), and a number that ends with 3 should have a suffix "rd" (except if it ends with 13).  All other numbers should end with "th".

Write a program `suffix` that reads in an integer number from the standard input and prints out the number with its ordinal suffix.

Your program should include a `void` function `print_with_suffix(long n)` that takes in the input and prints out the number followed by its suffix.

```
ooiwt@pe112:~/ex02-ooiwt$ ./suffix
2
2nd
ooiwt@pe112:~/ex02-ooiwt$ ./suffix
13
13th
ooiwt@pe112:~/ex02-ooiwt$ ./suffix
412
412th
ooiwt@pe112:~/ex02-ooiwt$ ./suffix
3
3rd
```

# Question 3: Days Since 1 January

Write a program called `days` that reads in two integers from the standard input, the first is the month (ranged 1 to 12, inclusive) and the second is the day (ranged 1 to 31, inclusive).  The program should print to the standard output which day of the year it is.  You can reuse the method `print_suffix` from the previous question.

```
ooiwt@pe112:~/ex02-ooiwt$ ./days
1 1
1st
ooiwt@pe112:~/ex02-ooiwt$ ./days
8 15
227th
ooiwt@pe112:~/ex02-ooiwt$ ./days
12 31
365th
```
