# Exercise 4: ID, Grade, Index, Max

This is a programming exercise for you to solve on your own.  You can submit but it will not be graded.  Test cases are provided for the exercises so that you can test and check on your own if your code is correct.  Feel free to discuss your solution with your peers or your TAs.

### Prerequisite

- You are able to access the [CS1010 programming environment](environments.md).
- You are familiar with [basic UNIX CLI](unix.md) and using terminal-based editor [`vim`](vim.md).
- You have a GitHub account and have setup `.gitconfig` (see [Exercise 1](ex02.md)).

### Learning Outcomes

- Be comfortable writing correct C programs that involve `if`, `else`, loops, logical statements, and arrays.
- Be able to decompose a more complex problem into smaller subproblems and write functions to solve the sub-problems.

### Setup

- Click on [this link](https://classroom.github.com/a/yaUvp1sZ) to accept the exercise.
- Log in to one of the hosts of [CS1010 programming environment (PE)](environments.md)
- Run the following on the command line on one of the PE hosts:

```
~cs1010/get-ex04
```

- You should see a new subdirectory `ex04-<githubid>` in your current working directory, where `githubid` is your GitHub ID.
- Inside that directory, you should see a bunch of files:
    - `id.c`, `grade.c`, `index.c` and `max.c` are the most important files.  They are the skeleton C code that you should edit to solve the exercise.
    - `inputs` and `outputs` are subdirectories that contain test inputs and test outputs.  We use the same convention as Exercise 1 so you should be familiar with them.
    - `Makefile`: This is the configuration for the tool `make` that we use to automate the compilation and testing of the programs.  
    - `test.sh`: This is a bash script for testing your code.

### Solving The Assignments

- Edit the .c files on the PE hosts to solve the corresponding question as described below.
- You can assume that all test inputs are valid inputs.
- To compile and run the given tests with the sample inputs and outputs, run on the command line,

```
make
```

This will compile all your C files and if there is no error, run the test scripts.


### Submission

When you are ready, run the following command while you are in the exercise directory:

```
~cs1010/submit-ex04
```

The .c files will be uploaded to GitHub.  You can submit multiple times.  As an exercise is not graded, submitting your code only serves the purpose of archiving your work for backup purposes.

-------

## Question 1: ID

Your NUS student id has a letter at the end.  This letter is called a _check code_ and is a form of redundancy check used for detecting errors, especially when your student id is manually entered into a software application.

Your check code is calculated by:

- Sum up the digits in your student id.  Let the sum be $N$.
- Divide $N$ by 13, and take the remainder.  Let the remainder be $R$
- Look up the table below:

| Remainder | Check Code |
|-----------|------------|
| 0 | Y |
| 1 | X |
| 2 | W |
| 3 | U | 
| 4 | R | 
| 5 | N |
| 6 | M | 
| 7 | L | 
| 8 | J | 
| 9 | H | 
| 10| E |
| 11| A |
| 12| B |

Write a program that reads in an integer containing the digits of a student's id from the standard input.  Print out the check code to the standard output.

You should practice using array to solve this problem instead of using a long if-else statement.

```
ooiwt@pe116:~/ex04-ooiwt$ ./studentid
1933091
Y
ooiwt@pe116:~/ex04-ooiwt$ ./studentid
3364497
E
ooiwt@pe116:~/ex04-ooiwt$ ./studentid
0123456
J
```

## Question 2: Grade

In a mirror universe, there is an evil version of your professor who is especially tough on his CS1010 students.  He use the following grading scheme to decide the letter grade to give out.

| Marks | Letter Grade |
|-----------|------------|
| 100  | A+ |
| 99   | A  |
| 98   | A- |
| 96-97 | B+ |
| 91-95 | B  |
| 86-90 | B- |
| 81-85 | C+ |
| 71-80 | C  |
| 61-70 | D+ |
| 51-60 | D  |
| 0 -50 | F  |

Write a program called `grade` that reads in an integer corresponding to the marks given to a student. Print out the letter graded given by the evil professor.

You should practice using array to solve this problem instead of using a long if-else statement as done in [Unit 8](08-if-else.md).

```
ooiwt@pe116:~/ex04-ooiwt$ ./grade
100
A+
ooiwt@pe116:~/ex04-ooiwt$ ./grade
99
A
ooiwt@pe116:~/ex04-ooiwt$ ./grade
50
F
ooiwt@pe116:~/ex04-ooiwt$ ./grade
87
B-
```

## Question 3: Index

Write a program `index` that finds a given number from a list of $n$ integers $L$.

The program should read the following from the standard inputs in order:

- The first number is a positive integer $n$
- The next $n$ numbers corresponds to the list of integers $l_0, l_1, ... l_{n-1}$ in $L$.
- The next number is a positive integer $k$
- The next $k$ numbers are integers corresponds to a list of queries $q_0, q_1, .. q_k$

For each query, the program should print (on a new line) the position of the integer in the list, or "not found" if the query cannot be found.  To be more precise, for each $i$, if $q_i == l_j$ for some $j$, print $j$.  If $q_i$ appears multiple times in $L$, print the smallest $j$.  If $q_i$ is not in $L$, then print "not found".

```
ooiwt@pe116:~/ex04-ooiwt$ cat input
5
-5 3 1 8 -5
3
1 4 -5
ooiwt@pe116:~/ex04-ooiwt$ ./index < input
2
not found
0
```

Line 1 of the input file `input` tells the program that there are five integers to read.  The next five integers should be read in as the list.  The next integer (Line 3) is 3.  The next three integers should be read in as queries.  The first query is 1, which can be found at position 2 (we start counting from 0).  The next query is 4, which is not found in the list.  Finally, the last query is -5, which can be found at position 0 and 4, but we return only the one at position 0.

## Question 4: Max

Write a program `max` that finds the maximum value from a list of $n$ integers $L$.

Instead of doing this with a loop, you should solve this question with recursion.  Write a function

```
long max(const long list[], long start, long end)
{
}
```

that calls itself and return the maximum value among the array elements `list[start]` .. `list[end - 1]`.  It should split the the input list into two halves (roughly), find the maximum of the left half, find the maximum of the right half, and return the larger of these two maximums.

In the function definition above, the keyword `const` (short for constant) is used to annotate that the array `list` is meant to remain unchanged.

The program should read the following from the standard inputs:

- The first number is a positive integer $n$
- The next $n$ numbers corresponds to the list of integers $L$.

and print to largest value among the inputs to the standard output.

```
ooiwt@pe116:~/ex04-ooiwt$ cat input
5
-5 3 1 8 2
ooiwt@pe116:~/ex04-ooiwt$ ./max < input
8
```
